
				JACAL

In December of 1987, in order to facilitate the design of constant
impedance electrical filters (diplexers), I wrote a symbolic circuit
analysis program.  It was written in LISP (2 weeks), implemented
Canonical Rational Expressions, and was not particularly sophisticated
(Euclidean GCD).  It worked directly with the small signal Laplace
Transform of currents, voltages, and impedances.  After doing some
reading about symbolic manipulation, I became fascinated with the
problem of canonical forms.  This interest produced JACAL.

JACAL is a symbolic mathematics system for the simplification and
manipulation of equations and single and multiple valued algebraic
expressions constructed of numbers, variables, radicals, and algebraic
functions, differential, and holonomic functions.  In addition,
vectors and matrices of the above objects are included.

JACAL is written in Scheme.  A version of Scheme (IEEE P1178 and R4RS
compliant) written in C is available with JACAL.  SCM runs on Amiga,
Atari-ST, MacOS, MS-DOS, OS/2, NOS/VE, VMS, Unix and similar systems.

To receive an IBM PC floppy disk with the documentation, source and
executable files, send $99.00 to: Aubrey Jaffer, 84 Pleasant St.,
Wakefield MA 01880 USA.

			      THE AUTHOR

I am a working programmer and electronic engineer.  I am also board
member of the League for Programming freedom, an organization of
people upset about the developing legal climate that's making it
difficult to write software without risk of litigation.  For more
information, contact: League for Programming Freedom, 1 Kendall
Square, #143, P.O. Box 9171, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA (617-621-7084
and 617-577-1209 FAX).
